328.

"William H. deVlaming, M.D.
Internal Medicine
1760 Gold Street
Redding, California 96001
916-243-1552

October 1, 1982

Father Herman
The Orthodox Word
St. Herman of Alaska Brotherhood
Platina, CA 96076

RE: Fr. Seraphim

As requested, I am enclosing a brief description of the problems experienced by Father Seraphim leading to his illness and complications recently resulting in his death.

Any vital organ of the body has a blood supply in which arteries lead blood into the organ and veins take the blood away. If there is a blockage of blood flow in either side of the circulation, the organ is not able to receive enough oxygen or nutrients to continue [to] function. In Father Seraphim, we believe that the blockage of the vein leading away from the intestines occurred several days prior to his admission to the hospital. This eventually resulted in death of the tissues of the intestine which in turn lead to a leakage of toxins from inside the bowel into the abdominal cavity, and from there into the general circulation. The results of the toxic product entering the circulation lead to a decline in other vital organ functions including the lungs and eventually the kidneys, brain, and heart. Even by the time the initial surgery was completed, damage had already been done to several important organs. Most likely is a complication of a general decline in total body function, other intestine began to be involved in the same process leading to the initial bowel damage resulting in a progressive reduction in blood flow to an extensive area of a bowel. The cycle of toxic material escaping from inside the bowel into the general circulation repeated itself and eventually depressed the lung and heart function to the point that life could no longer [be] maintained. Pulmonary edema simply means damage to the lung resulting in fluid collecting between the tiny air sacks and preventing normal function. Respiratory acidosis again relates to inadequate ventilation by the lungs resulting in an accumulation of carbon dioxide in the body. I hope that this information will be helpful.

Warmest regards,

William H. deVlaming, M.D.
Internal Medicine

---

Respiratory failure
Due to: Bowel Necrosis
Due to: Ischaemic Bowel
other conditions
renal failure
[signed] Gary B. Dandy

